Readme.md, before:

# Random Sampling for Group-By Queries

Implemented algorithm that dynamically computes a random sampling for a single aggregation, multiple group by using [Apache Flink](https://flink.apache.org/) and [Apache Kafka](https://kafka.apache.org/). The algorithm implementation was based on the following [paper](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1909.02629.pdf).

Our approach parses a stream of twice and perfoms sampling for group by queries. Given that the stream must be parsed twice, we can use this implementation  ***only on bounded streams***. During the first pass we compute average, standard deviation,γi statistics for each stratum(group by) and total γ (sum of all γi values).In the second pass, we can perform sampling using all statistics precomputed in first pass.

Between stages we use Apache Kafka to produce-consume data. The initial stream of data can be parsed from .csv files.

## Implementation Analysis
### CSV_Parser

##### Description    
Class is responsible to parse data from a .csv file and appends them to a certain Kafka topic


##### Arguments

Available arguments are listed below

|  Required  | Description |
| ------ | ------ |
| -csv-path | full path to the .csv we wish |
| -topic | Kafka topic to write data parsed from .csv |


|  Optional  | Description  | Default |
| ------ | ------ | ------ |
| -ip |  give ip for our server to work | localhost:9092 |
| -header-exists | Ignore first line when there is header option (0 when there is no header, 1 when there is header to ignore in csv | 1(header exists) |

### FirstAlgorithmPass
##### Description    

This is the implementation of the first required job for our algorithm. In this job we parse data for the first time (bounded stream) and compute required aggregation such as average, count for each stratum (each stratum is formed by each distinct a group by attribute). We also compute values γi for each stratum and γ(sum of γι for all stratum) which are required in the second pass of the algorithm

##### Arguments

Available arguments are listed below
|  Required  | Description |
| ------ | ------ |
| -all-attributes | All fields contained in the parsed .csv file(all csv fields) comma seperated |
| -keys | all keys to create stratum from group bys comma seperated(from attributes) |
| -aggr | field for aggregation from attributes(Currently only one is supported) |

|  Optional  | Description  | Default |
| ------ | ------ | ------ |
| -p | Parallelism in execution environment | 4 |
| -input-topic | Kafka topic that includes our main stream | input-topic-job1 |
| -output-topic | Kafka topic to export the aggregations required in the second pass | output-topic-job1 |
| -consumer-group | Kafka consumer group | KafkaCsvProducer |
| -ip | Give ip for our server to work | localhost:9092 |
| -windows-time | User-defined time for windows | 30 |

> NOTE: User must ensure that there is adequate time in the time window for all entries to be processed

**IMPORTANT: During this pass kafka reads our stream as defined from -input-topic and writes the result(aggregation values) to a new topic as defined from output-topic-job1. However, to support dynamic group by, we perform some modification to initial stream and create another topic with name _<-input-topic>.(e.x if -input-topic= "new-topic", our custom stream is named _new-topic).As input in the second algorithm pass we use the topic containing the initial stream(!). This detail is important, as the created topic has the default properties from Kafka and --partition and --replication value is always 1. So, in order to increase parallelism and partition data evenly the user must define previously topics with custom properties**


### SecondAlgorithmPass
##### Description    
In this second pass of the algorithm, we parse once again the initial data stream. Also we use aggregation data extracted from first pass and combined we execute our demanded algorithm

##### Arguments

Available arguments are listed below

|  Optional  | Description  | Default |
| ------ | ------ | ------ |
| -p | Parallelism in execution environment | 4 |
| -input-topic | Kafka topic that includes our main stream | input-topic-job1 |
| -output-topic | Kafka topic to export the final results after job2 executes | output-topic-job2 |
| -aggr-topic | Kafka topic to access the aggregations required in the second pass | output-topic-job2 |
| -consumer-group | Kafka consumer group | KafkaCsvProducer |
| -ip | Give ip for our server to work | localhost:9092 |
| -windows-time | User-defined time for windows | 30 |
| -M | Variable demanded in the algorithm | 20 |

> NOTE: User must ensure that there is adequate time in the time window for all entries to be processed


## Execution Example on Linux

As first step activate zookeeper and kafka servers

##### Window 1
- Start zookeeper server

```sh
$ /<Kafka_path>/bin/zookeeper-server-start.sh /<Kafka_path>/config/zookeeper.properties
```


##### Window 2
- Start Kafka server

```sh
$ /<Kafka_path>/bin/kafka-server-start.sh /<Kafka_path>/config/server.properties
```

Now kafka servers are up and running waiting for new topics to be created.

##### Window 3
- Start flink cluster
```sh
$ /<flink_path>/bin/start-cluster.sh
```
To confirm that flink servers started successfully open any browser and type http://localhost:8081/

It should look something like that


![ ](/MyDocs/images/0.png)

##### Window 4

Open a new terminal in the project directory folder `/ECE622/` and execute the following command to compile and build project
```sh
$ mvn clean package
```
BUILD SUCCESS message should show up. This commands generates a .jar files which will be used to execute our code from command line. Jar file can be found in the directory  `/ECE622/target/ECE622-1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar`

The execution should start from CSV_Parser to parse data from a .csv file and append them to a kafka topic
```sh
$ /<flink_path>/bin/flink run -c utils.CSV_Parser <project_path>/ECE622/target/ECE622-1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar -csv-path <csv_path> -topic input-topic-job1 -p 4 
```


In our example, we use population.csv file located in `/MyDocs/` directory. See sections above to check all available arguments for CSV_Parser.

Procedure finished message as shown below demonstrates that parser completed

![ ](/MyDocs/images/1.png)

> NOTE: In order to avoid unexpected behaviour, wait for steps to complete and generate output

In order to check that kafka received our data we can use the following command
```sh
$ <kafka_path>/kafka-console-consumer.sh --bootstrap-server localhost:9092 --topic <topic_name> --from-beginning;
```


We should see all the data contained in that specific topic. In our execution `population.csv` contains 70080 entries(excluding header) and as we can see all entries were parsed correctly.

![ ](/MyDocs/images/2.png)

Next step is to execute the first algorithm pass using the following command

```sh
$ /<flink_path>/bin/flink run -c tuc.FirstAlgorithmPass /<project_path>/ECE622/target/ECE622-1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar -all-attributes Year,District.Code,District.Name,Neighborhood.Code,Neighborhood.Name,Gender,Age,Number -keys District.Name,District.Code -aggr Number -p 4 -windows-time 60
```


In our example we use default topic input and output values. See sections above to check all available arguments for FirstAlgorithmPass.


As expected from our default topics we can see data in the topics __*output_topic_job1(aggregation values)*__ and ***_input-topic-job1(Initial custom stream )*** after execution

![ ](/MyDocs/images/3.png)
*Topic output-topic-job1*

![ ](/MyDocs/images/4.png)
*Topic _input-topic-job1*

##### Window 5

Final step is to execute the second algorithm pass using the following command
```sh
$ <flink_path>/bin/flink run -c tuc.SecondAlgorithmPass <project_path>/ECE622-1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar -p 4 -windows-time 60
```

In our example we use default topic input and output values. See sections above to check all available arguments for FirstAlgorithmPass.

We can see final output results in topic ***output-topic-job2***

![ ](/MyDocs/images/6.png)

We can also verify our result from the web UI of flink. In the image below we notice our two jobs running succeessfuly

![ ](/MyDocs/images/5.png)

Each seperate job preserves metrics and statistics such as Records received/sent that match our desired behaviour

![ ](/MyDocs/images/8.png)
*FirstAlgorithmPass*

![ ](/MyDocs/images/7.png)
*SecondAlgorithmPass*

In addition, task manager preserves Stdout logs producing output we wish for both seperate jobs in one place

![ ](/MyDocs/images/9.png)


We also demonstrate for both jobs the plan visualizer https://flink.apache.org/visualizer/


![ ](/MyDocs/images/11.png)
*FirstAlgorithmPass*

![ ](/MyDocs/images/10.png)
*SecondAlgorithmPass*

> NOTE: In our examples we didn't create kafka topic. Instead Kafka created topics when a topic that did't exist encountered. In this case, kafka has default values with partition 1 and replication 1. In case you wish to create custom topic use on of the following command
```sh
$ <kafka_path>/bin/kafka-console-consumer.sh --bootstrap-server localhost:9092 --topic <topic name> --from-beginning
```

> NOTE:To make things easier created two scripts in directory `/MyDocs/Scripts/` jobsExec and kafkaExec. JobsExec demonstrates the example as show above and requires ***three parameters <kafka_path> <flink_path> <project_path>*** to execute. Kafka exec is used to show all the different **default topics** and requires ***one parameter <kafka_path>***

Commit message:

Added rebalance and updated script

Readme.md, after:

# Random Sampling for Group-By Queries

Implemented algorithm that dynamically computes a random sampling for a single aggregation, multiple group by using [Apache Flink](https://flink.apache.org/) and [Apache Kafka](https://kafka.apache.org/). The algorithm implementation was based on the following [paper](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1909.02629.pdf).

Our approach parses a stream of twice and perfoms sampling for group by queries. Given that the stream must be parsed twice, we can use this implementation  ***only on bounded streams***. During the first pass we compute average, standard deviation,γi statistics for each stratum(group by) and total γ (sum of all γi values).In the second pass, we can perform sampling using all statistics precomputed in first pass.

Between stages we use Apache Kafka to produce-consume data. The initial stream of data can be parsed from .csv files.

## Implementation Analysis

### CSV_Parser
##### Description    
Class is responsible to parse data from a .csv file and appends them to a certain Kafka topic


##### Arguments

Available arguments are listed below

|  Required  | Description |
| ------ | ------ |
| -csv-path | full path to the .csv we wish |
| -topic | Kafka topic to write data parsed from .csv |


|  Optional  | Description  | Default |
| ------ | ------ | ------ |
| -ip |  give ip for our server to work | localhost:9092 |
| -header-exists | Ignore first line when there is header option (0 when there is no header, 1 when there is header to ignore in csv | 1(header exists) |

### FirstAlgorithmPass
##### Description    

This is the implementation of the first required job for our algorithm. In this job we parse data for the first time (bounded stream) and compute required aggregation such as average, count for each stratum (each stratum is formed by each distinct a group by attribute). We also compute values γi for each stratum and γ(sum of γι for all stratum) which are required in the second pass of the algorithm

##### Arguments

Available arguments are listed below

|  Required  | Description |
| ------ | ------ |
| -all-attributes | All fields contained in the parsed .csv file(all csv fields) comma seperated |
| -keys | all keys to create stratum from group bys comma seperated(from attributes) |
| -aggr | field for aggregation from attributes(Currently only one is supported) |

|  Optional  | Description  | Default |
| ------ | ------ | ------ |
| -p | Parallelism in execution environment | 4 |
| -input-topic | Kafka topic that includes our main stream | input-topic-job1 |
| -output-topic | Kafka topic to export the aggregations required in the second pass | output-topic-job1 |
| -consumer-group | Kafka consumer group | KafkaCsvProducer |
| -ip | Give ip for our server to work | localhost:9092 |
| -windows-time | User-defined time for windows | 30 |

> NOTE: User must ensure that there is adequate time in the time window for all entries to be processed

**IMPORTANT: During this pass kafka reads our stream as defined from -input-topic and writes the result(aggregation values) to a new topic as defined from output-topic-job1. However, to support dynamic group by, we perform some modification to initial stream and create another topic with name _<-input-topic>.(e.x if -input-topic= "new-topic", our custom stream is named _new-topic).As input in the second algorithm pass we use the topic containing the initial stream(!). This detail is important, as the created topic has the default properties from Kafka and --partition and --replication value is always 1. So, in order to increase parallelism and partition data evenly the user must define previously topics with custom properties**


### SecondAlgorithmPass
##### Description    
In this second pass of the algorithm, we parse once again the initial data stream. Also we use aggregation data extracted from first pass and combined we execute our demanded algorithm

##### Arguments

Available arguments are listed below

|  Optional  | Description  | Default |
| ------ | ------ | ------ |
| -p | Parallelism in execution environment | 4 |
| -input-topic | Kafka topic that includes our main stream | input-topic-job1 |
| -output-topic | Kafka topic to export the final results after job2 executes | output-topic-job2 |
| -aggr-topic | Kafka topic to access the aggregations required in the second pass | output-topic-job2 |
| -consumer-group | Kafka consumer group | KafkaCsvProducer |
| -ip | Give ip for our server to work | localhost:9092 |
| -windows-time | User-defined time for windows | 30 |
| -M | Variable demanded in the algorithm | 20 |

> NOTE: User must ensure that there is adequate time in the time window for all entries to be processed


## Execution Example on Linux

As first step activate zookeeper and kafka servers

##### Window 1
- Start zookeeper server

```sh
$ /<Kafka_path>/bin/zookeeper-server-start.sh /<Kafka_path>/config/zookeeper.properties
```


##### Window 2
- Start Kafka server

```sh
$ /<Kafka_path>/bin/kafka-server-start.sh /<Kafka_path>/config/server.properties
```

Now kafka servers are up and running waiting for new topics to be created.

##### Window 3
- Start flink cluster
```sh
$ /<flink_path>/bin/start-cluster.sh
```
To confirm that flink servers started successfully open any browser and type http://localhost:8081/

It should look something like that


![ ](/images/0.png)

##### Window 4

Open a new terminal in the project directory folder `/ECE622/` and execute the following command to compile and build project
```sh
$ mvn clean package
```
BUILD SUCCESS message should show up. This commands generates a .jar files which will be used to execute our code from command line. Jar file can be found in the directory  `/ECE622/target/ECE622-1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar`

The execution should start from CSV_Parser to parse data from a .csv file and append them to a kafka topic
```sh
$ /<flink_path>/bin/flink run -c utils.CSV_Parser <project_path>/ECE622/target/ECE622-1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar -csv-path <csv_path> -topic input-topic-job1 -p 4 
```


In our example, we use population.csv file located in `/MyDocs/` directory. See sections above to check all available arguments for CSV_Parser.

Procedure finished message as shown below demonstrates that parser completed

![ ](/MyDocs/images/1.png)

> NOTE: In order to avoid unexpected behaviour, wait for steps to complete and generate output

In order to check that kafka received our data we can use the following command
```sh
$ <kafka_path>/kafka-console-consumer.sh --bootstrap-server localhost:9092 --topic <topic_name> --from-beginning;
```


We should see all the data contained in that specific topic. In our execution `population.csv` contains 70080 entries(excluding header) and as we can see all entries were parsed correctly.

![ ](/MyDocs/images/2.png)

Next step is to execute the first algorithm pass using the following command

```sh
$ /<flink_path>/bin/flink run -c tuc.FirstAlgorithmPass /<project_path>/ECE622/target/ECE622-1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar -all-attributes Year,District.Code,District.Name,Neighborhood.Code,Neighborhood.Name,Gender,Age,Number -keys District.Name,District.Code -aggr Number -p 4 -windows-time 60
```


In our example we use default topic input and output values. See sections above to check all available arguments for FirstAlgorithmPass.


As expected from our default topics we can see data in the topics __*output_topic_job1(aggregation values)*__ and ***_input-topic-job1(Initial custom stream )*** after execution

![ ](/MyDocs/images/3.png)
*Topic output-topic-job1*

![ ](/MyDocs/images/4.png)
*Topic _input-topic-job1*

##### Window 5

Final step is to execute the second algorithm pass using the following command
```sh
$ <flink_path>/bin/flink run -c tuc.SecondAlgorithmPass <project_path>/ECE622-1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar -p 4 -windows-time 60
```

In our example we use default topic input and output values. See sections above to check all available arguments for FirstAlgorithmPass.

We can see final output results in topic ***output-topic-job2***

![ ](/MyDocs/images/6.png)

We can also verify our result from the web UI of flink. In the image below we notice our two jobs running succeessfuly

![ ](/MyDocs/images/5.png)

Each seperate job preserves metrics and statistics such as Records received/sent that match our desired behaviour

![ ](/MyDocs/images/8.png)
*FirstAlgorithmPass*

![ ](/MyDocs/images/7.png)
*SecondAlgorithmPass*

In addition, task manager preserves Stdout logs producing output we wish for both seperate jobs in one place

![ ](/MyDocs/images/9.png)


We also demonstrate for both jobs the plan visualizer https://flink.apache.org/visualizer/


![ ](/MyDocs/images/11.png)
*FirstAlgorithmPass*

![ ](/MyDocs/images/10.png)
*SecondAlgorithmPass*

> NOTE: In our examples we didn't create kafka topic. Instead Kafka created topics when a topic that did't exist encountered. In this case, kafka has default values with partition 1 and replication 1. In case you wish to create custom topic use on of the following command

```sh
$ <kafka_path>/bin/kafka-console-consumer.sh --bootstrap-server localhost:9092 --topic <topic name> --from-beginning
```

> NOTE:To make things easier created two scripts in directory `/MyDocs/Scripts/` jobsExec and kafkaExec. JobsExec executes the example as shown above and requires ***four parameters <kafka_path> <flink_path> <project_path> <csv_path>*** to execute(open script to check example with parameters). Kafka exec is used to show all the different **default topics** and requires ***one parameter <kafka_path>***
